# Lightning talks


With a conference schedule that's chosen months ahead of time, having a
co-ordinated off-the-cuff presentation format is exceedingly useful for
attendees. 

These lightning talks are five-minute talks, selected daily, presented to the
full audience after the afternoon invited speaker, and can be summed up as...
eclectic. 

---

Lightning talks are 5 minute long talks that can be about anything: it doesn't
have to be Python. You don't even have to have a laptop or slides to present!
The only stipulations we have are that the talk cannot be a vendor talk, a
sales pitch, or an advertisement. We've had talks on
[potatoes](https://youtu.be/q2VmIUaOS9o?t=30), [actual
bugs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rNkbmu4e3MA&t=3036s), the [history of
supermarkets in Australia and New
Zealand](https://youtu.be/AJqcxEzRdSY?t=1095)... and that's just the tip of the
iceberg. 

PyCon AU has two lightning talk sessions, on each of the main conference
afternoons, presented to the whole conference, in the keynote room. The room is
already setup with two lecterns, which is important later. The lightning talks
are also recorded. 

The sessions are chaired by a specific volunteer, affectionately called 'The
Lightning Talk Czar' . This position has been filled by the same volunteer for
many years, as they have experience with this setup, along with various
background helpers as required. 


The selection process is normally thus: 

Two boxes are setup at registration, one for First Time speakers, one for
Experienced speakers. At the opening of each day we announce and remind
speakers that lightning talks are on again, and that submissions close at the
end of the morning break, with selection notifications to be made by the end of
lunch. 

There are cards and pens placed at registration where submitters are asked to
write down: 

 * Their name and email * The title of the talk, and * The summary (TL;DR) of
the talk. 

As per [our page](https://2019.pycon-au.org/lightning-talks/) on the subject: 

> The TL;DR is important. Your talk will be announced with your name and title
only. We want the TL;DR to be exactly what your talk will be about. We want the
spoiler, the prestige, the summary. Your card will not be on public display, so
spoilers are OK

Once submissions have closed, the Czar and papers chair (or delegate member of
the core team) go through the submissions and choose a selection of talks based
on a few factors: 
 
 * A balance of first time and experienced speakers * A wide range of topics *
A general sense of enjoyment or learning from the audience. 

The selection process is very ad-hoc, and must happen within a very short
window, so a lot of it is gut feel. 

Some of the sorts of talks that aren't selected are be things like:  

 * A submission on a topic from a speaker who had a full-length talk to speak
about the same topic.  * A talk that read like a product pitch or advertisement
(summaries are important!) * Illegible submissions (handwriting is important!)

From there, the accepted speakers are notified as soon as selections are made,
as to give them as much time as possible to prepare. For an hour slot, 12
speakers would be selected, with 3 extras in case of 'overflow': since talks
are a maximum of 5 minutes, and lightning talks are normally scheduled to run
into conference close, timing can be flexible for the block (but not for each
speaker). 

Then, showtime: 

Speakers are asked to be at the front of the room at the start of the session,
and if they're on time there's often chance to let them all know the order in
which they'll present. 

Once the session starts, the Czar gives the time honoured traditional "How to
lightning talk" talk: 
 
 * Talks are five minutes long * They'll be a timer at the front of the room
(normally supplied by [lightningtimer.io](http://lightningtimer.io/) * When the
timer gets down to ~10 seconds left, start lightly clapping your two index
fingers together. This creates a soft noise and a visible audience action to
give the speaker a heads up that their time is almost over * When the time runs
out, the audience is actively encouraged to clap loudly to effectively
congratulate -- but also stop -- the speaker from talking. 
 

Protip: LightningTimer.io defaults to five minutes, but will take custom
values: e.g. [180 seconds](http://lightningtimer.io/#180)

Back to the two lecterns: this allows for a hot-swap of speakers. When one
speaker is giving their talk, on the other lectern the next speaker is setting
up (they're often told they're "on deck", which is their queue to setup).
They'll have the time of the other speaker to setup (if that speaker is
sufficiently short, pity is normally given and they have some extra time to
setup). 

Speakers swap back and forth until the session is over, or the speakers run
out, whichever comes first. 

When the recording is released, it's often a really good idea to ensure the
upload has the timestamps of the different talk start times. Using the format
"MM:SS" within a YouTube description, that time in the video can be immediately
jumped to (see [this
example](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BmWLhVMWC9I&t=1101s)). 


Lighting talks are a great way to get first time speakers their first try and
public speaking, to share conference memes so that everyone gets the jokes, and
to learn about things that wouldn't normally get a stage in such an event.
They're a time-honoured tradition that we'll continue to host year on year.



